[Music]
hey everyone welcome to the smart
economy podcast a production of neon
newday.com I'm your host Dylan Grabowski
in this episode of the smart economy
podcast we were joined by Philipe
shamers the head of infrastructure at
nosis an entity that is built a variety
of decentralized infrastructure for the
ethereum ecosystem dating back to its
Inception in 2015 in this episode
phelipe and I spoke about the history of
the nosis ecosystem and its various
products how nosis chain is similar to
but different from the ethereum chain
building me resistance into the core
protocol how governance impacts
infrastructural development various
technical aspects of nosis chain and the
broader ecosystem and much more just a
reminder nothing said on this podcast is
a solicitation to buy or sell any tokens
that the host or guests May hold tokens
discussed in any given episode and that
users can check out our disclaimer page
on neon.pdf
infrastructure at nosis an entity that
has built a plethora of decentralized
infrastructure for the ethereum
ecosystem and now evm land uh how you
doing today phleep so I'm doing very
well thank thank you what about you I'm
doing great um I had a chance to kind of
dig into some of your previous talks
like at dcon last year and I'm excited
to kind of jump into the technical and
infrastructure space of um blockchain in
general so I'm really excited about this
conversation today um but nosis has been
around for quite a long time so I think
that there is a um a an EMP a level of
kind of respect that uh you and your
team bring to the blockchain industry so
I'm really curious to just kind of hear
your insights as you're the head of
infrastructure atosis uh going on nine
years now so before we jump into the
conversation I kind of want to talk
about the broader blockchain industry
and just hear what the head of
infrastructure at a long running project
has to think about um this kind of
dual-sided question so first what are
some of the critical element elements of
blockchain that have made this such a
staying Force this technology that can't
die and secondly um what are some of the
critical missing elements that we need
to build in order to make this
technology uh robust and everlasting
yeah so very good question um I think
well to explain why it's a technology
that's well cannot be destroyed
basically and it's here to last that's
basically the entire idea of it right so
um having it being decentralized and I
mean not dependent on any Central entity
um meaning of course that no I mean no
company can jut it down no governments
technically can shut it down either um
so I mean robustness is designed in
inside the protocol right so that was
the initial goal of Bitcoin forum is
exactly the same uh no I guess are
chains that are let um focus on that
side and More in speed or security or
whatever other types of tradeoffs but
for eum um and nois because we are based
on on eum of course um those are the the
pill items decentralized censorship
resistance um yeah I mean that that's
most of it of course having a very large
set of node runners in many different
countries many different jur
jurisdictions um different skill levels
different type of people I mean just
having a very diverse set of node
Runners and valers and clients um as
well so for example on ethereum we have
I mean many different execution a
clients and consens a clients
um that also make it so that if one of
them has an issue the other ones I mean
make sure the network keeps going on
basically um and that's also very very
important I guess on ethereum side is
actually maybe a bit better than Bitcoin
as far as I know because I think they
only have one client um but L of CHS
such as s I'm pretty sure also having
multiple CHS as well right now so I
think that's very important um indeed
yeah and so that the driv specs of
course that makes it so that Network
cannot be shut down and will live on
forever so from your perspective what is
missing what do we need to build further
to ensure that this um diversity and
decentralization of validator set of
node Runners of clients uh this is great
it's gotten us to this point but um you
know if mission was accomplished then we
wouldn't have nosis continuing to build
and we wouldn't have uh you and your
team working on next iterations and
bringing out uh new main Nets of uh the
next level of your blockchain so what is
missing then what do we need to build
further what do we need as an industry
to secure uh the values that this
decentralization has brought to this
technology right so I think there are
actually a few missing pieces um I would
say the most important ones are uh
scalability of course because we I mean
on ethereum it's quite expensive let's
be real for a minute uh like doing
transactions is not accessible to
everyone right um for me eum will have
achieved its goal when everyone in the
world will be able to um well maybe not
on the base layer maybe not on eum but
on layer twos or layer threes or
whatever um the community is going to
come up with but when everyone is able
to use a technology then we will have
sufficiently scaled and we are very far
from that right now
um so that's the very important part and
I think um I mean upcoming hard Forks
like I mean hopefully
work um soon let's hope so should I mean
at least be a stepping Zone towards that
um I mean yeah staing has also multiple
um S I would say so first of course a
number of transactions but we also need
to be able to kind of scale quote
unquote um in a sense that users need to
be able to run nodes um in an easier way
or less resource in intensive way sorry
um so right now e nodes and and no no by
extension I mean again we are on the
very same stack and don't use that much
like CPU and Ram or even bandd so that's
kind of fine but you use a lot of this
space um and this of course will
continue growing forever basically
that's the US isue so having nice CLI
which um hopefully will facil that at
some point uh is very important so
that's for the scalable part I would say
uh and then of course everything that
has to do with um user experience
basically so being able to interact with
the chain without having to like safely
store neonic um make sure you don't get
I mean you don't lose it because then
you fun you don't like leak it or get it
s or whatever because then again you
resp funds um and yeah understanding how
to I mean which one to use making sure
you're interacting in safe way with
contract so they are don't know what not
that that do this of course so better uh
like explicitly show what happens when
you set a transaction for example okay
if you sign this you will transfer 10 e
out and get for example then you might
know that it's a scam or whatever um but
we are still very far from having very
good user experience and start recer to
get like larger adoption um so yeah both
one the main points in my opinion I I'm
a I'm a Believer um I left a previous
career to work in the blockchain space
so I've been here thick and thin since
basically 2017 but I do want to play
Devil's Advocate um the longest running
issue since I've been here basically has
been this issue of scalability in ux so
while there still needs to be
Improvement um maybe uh you could share
a little bit of insights as to to how
scalability in ux has improved over the
years even though we still have a long
ways to go of course um so I mean for so
let's be quite I mean on topic right now
we are waiting for the Denon for right
that's 42 is going to happen on March
13th and for nosis chain two days before
that so March 11th um this is like I
mean a very important out for in my
opinion because um it will a type of
transaction that will allow people
basically to store data on chain but for
a defined um time period basically so
that data will expire after around two
weeks uh so it's Emeral and that's very
important because then no Runners don't
have to sort this forever which is one
of the scalability um issues right um
and because we have that data now we can
I mean have l2s on on top of it so we
will have more
data well maybe it's a bit more
difficult to explain than that but
basically we have stand transactions
that don't change and um basically work
like now uh and we will add a I mean the
adds a second part so for specifically
so it it that scal scalability by
default because we don't R what we have
before and we add additional data
storage and that data storage will be
used primarily by the two uh chains um
which of course then also scale ethereum
kind of indirectly of course it's not
the base layer but still you get
basically the security from ethereum and
most advantages from it um through
theayer 2 Chains um so this is great
progress I would say uh so that's now in
in in to week I would I guess so um
looking forward to that and on the ux
side um yeah I mean I don't have such a
concrete example but uh as I mentioned
before wets have improved so that they
actually like emulate transaction uh and
not only tell you that it's going to
fail or succeed but also what actually
is going to happen for example rabi
wallet um does this quite well and just
shows you what's going to happen uh also
on the security side um well if you
interact with some known scams or
fishing sites or contracts or whatever
um this is also taken care of I would
say mostly at this uh time of course the
C abstraction is also a good point
forward um it's I mean the current
implementation I'm not necessarily um
convinced by but at least is a setting
Stone toward something that can at some
point become useful hopefully um but for
example safe is doing a fantastic job
for securing um your accounts and
currencies and cpto whatever a bit a bit
better uh um so yeah and in nois we are
actually working on nosis wallet which
is well a wallet wallet it's also going
to integrate um NOP so NOP the upcoming
well actually they launch now so um they
launch with every fifth I think um so
yeah Visa debit card sorry that uh is
fully non already so that takes the
tokens directly from on chain um and wet
will integrate a classical wallet I
would say crypto wallet with this um
crypto debit cards yeah I love that
actually I was before you you were kind
of trying to figure out what ux ask to
talk about an account abstraction um is
I work in a non-m ecosystem and account
abstraction is something that we're
talking about integrating into the core
layer so that's a specific instance in
which uh maybe it's not up to Snuff uh
where you would like to see it but it is
something that other ecosystems would
like to emulate and it is nice to go
into ether skin and see if there was a
fraudulent address that was used for
fishing or scamming and other types of
scamming addresses so I appreciate the
insights that you have for kind of how
these areas have improved over the past
years um so kind of digging a little bit
into your background um I'm just curious
to hear how you ended up here you have a
background in web and mobile app
development so what was your trajectory
like coming into the blockchain space
how did you um get interested in
blockchain and then end up at swarm and
now at nosis uh well so initially I
started at swarm I mean so I I did my M
thesis basic basically on decentralized
data storage for iot devices um so this
got me into everything related to this
restoration so swarm are we fcoin
ipfs um all those fun things um and I
participated or not in in the Discord
basically to well you know get some
information from the death team but also
help others out test the technology
basically um see where we are at at the
moment and if this can actually be used
for something
useful um and then I guess I got uper a
job at SW for being like I and basically
doing what I was already doing but as a
a community
manager um but yeah I mean I I have
master degree in in computer science um
so after doing like the Community
Management I quickly became I mean
because I was doing this while doing my
master thesis as well but after that I
became a developer um s is actually
deployed on nois which is how the
connection kind of happens um yeah and
then I basically did the same thing for
no I was also very active um I think
during the merge so yeah a bit more than
a year ago um and yeah same thing I
joined sosis on that and actually maybe
another funny story on that side so I
actually um had a fabook game in the
past that had like 130 million players
which is a lot like it was one of the
biggest games on the platform for I
think two years um and yeah so up to
four million a day which is quite
substantial yeah but sadly like Facebook
decided one day uh to another to just
close us for no par reason um and that
actually like increased the conviction
about like blood chain censorship
resistance and no one being able to like
sh you down for no reason so yeah I
became kind of convinced based on on
this specific interaction as well that's
kind of uh very similar to vitalic
origin story with his um World of
Warcraft item being taken away or uh
it's striking power reduced because of
the centralized powers that be um also
we had Gregor uh the executive director
of found uh swarm foundation on the
podcast last year so it's nice to have a
fellow alma mater from that
decentralized file storage uh protocol
you you talked about kind of the Cs
element the computer science element and
how you were working on your Masters and
kind of this uh moment where this game
you worked on got removed from the
Facebook Marketplace seemingly for no
reason even though you had four million
daily active users um that's a very kind
of like technological oriented origin
story uh but what about like the first
time you heard about uh the digital
asset itself like Bitcoin or ethereum um
what were kind of your initial thoughts
you strike me as a very Builder F first
focused type of individual so did did
the digital asset itself just kind of
like not do it for you did you look past
it were you just like oh this is cool
and then thought about something else
what was kind of like the first time you
heard about crypto basically uh that's a
good question I'm not sure I actually
remember I know it must have started
between
2014 and 15 I would guess um so like in
the days when you still could get
actually Bitcoin from posets um maybe it
was even a bit before actually don't
remember I know I played a bit with it
and then um I mean didn't do anything
useful with it so forgot about it for a
few years and then I think in 2017 I
started mining a bit again because I
thought it was very interesting as a
concept I did it on ethereum um yeah and
then at that at that point I started I'm
looking a bit more into I mean many
chains and technology and actually
understanding what is going on and how
it works and what Blain actually is
because of course you start by seeing
Bitcoin okay money go up whenever I mean
back in the day it was less the case but
um many people I would I would just at
least I in the ecosystem for making
money basically um but yeah that I can I
mean that's not sufficient I mean
something that just goes up that makes
no sense and then just making money
what's up buy right I yeah I am very
technological this I mean focused I
would say so yeah I want to understand
how it works why it works um what can be
improved I mean yeah but at the time I
said I wasn't in full time by by any
means it was just mostly for time I
guess yeah I mean the first time I came
across Bitcoin was I was a broke grad
student in 2013 and uh it had dropped to
like
$300 and I remember seeing memes on uh
on Reddit and it just kind of like went
over my head and then didn't come back
for four more years until the Ico boom
and kind of got bit by the bug of what
these decentralized projects promised um
so it's it's really kind of interesting
that you bring this philosophy to your
role at nosis and at the beginning of
the conversation we mentioned kind of
like the OG status that nosis has it's
among the longest running blockchain
projects it's gone through several
iterations since 2015 it was one of the
first consensus supported projects that
the consensus entity kind of um gave
support to so maybe um you could just
give the listener who is maybe a newer
Market entrant from the class of 2021 or
maybe is just stumbling into the
blockchain and crypto space for the
first time today can you just kind of
give us um the elevator pitch or the
quick brief overview of what nosis is
and kind of run through the history um
and maybe some of the major iterations
that the ecosystem has done since 2015
okay so I mean I don't noce funny
recently so I I mean since 2015 I'm not
quite sure um but I mean yeah nois is
very active in in the BR industry of
course they started with prediction
markets and then um of course no say I
mean yeah no happened I guess which is
now going wanted so it's based on out um
and then of course no protocol which
became cowap which is UN main no chain
that is like kind of similar to I mean
not the same but I guess people know
unisoft a bit more still of course is
why ber but
anyways um of course a lot of um like VC
aspect as well some noes invest heavily
in many different projects um I mean
yeah a very interesting ecosystem where
a bit of everything I guess so the wet
the dpip aspects car as well that's that
just SP out as well or is been spinning
out I'm not quite sure um that is doing
treasury management um I think they do
it for and The Noy um so yeah that's
already three bigger projects uh no
chain now since I just I'm not quite
sure anymore with two two and a half
years that was previously ex so we have
the chain we have the defy um platform
treasure management um account
directions the safe wallet um what else
I mean I'm sure there's many on the
projects uh many of which are actually
working on right now of course no pay
being a huge one um so I guess is more
focused on payments right now so for the
next two years probably um everything
related to user experience making it
possible for for users to actually use
like I mean yeah normal nontechnical
users to have access to crypto with for
example that Visa debit card um so
that's know wantet which will also be
way more accessible to users than maybe
a metamask or something like that on on
mobile um yeah a bit of everything I
would say at clis yeah no I mean I feel
like in order to survive this long in an
industry where people's uh perceptions
of a project can change overnight um we
really do have to kind of continue
iterating and building upon the the
composable building blocks that came
before and I think that that's what's so
commendable about nosis um you you just
listed off a series of projects and
protocols and products and focus areas
and um having been in an ecosystem
that's been around since 2015 myself um
if you don't continue to iterate and
improve then then you just kind of like
slowly fade away and I think something
that I'm taking away from uh a lot of
the talking points that you're bringing
up is nois pay um and I kind of had my
mind blown last year uh when the stable
coin talk started becoming more parent
alongside this real world asset kind of
narrative and um like long story short
uh the killer crypto use case today is
tether uh usdt and it's on Tron
everybody's using tether on Tron and so
this is just a kind of a calling from
the market stating that they do indeed
want payment options which is what
cryptocurrency was supposed to be to
begin with if you read the Bitcoin white
paper it was supposed to be a digital
cash uh an internet native currency so I
think that that's uh super cool to hear
that there's a focus on payments and I
really want to talk about that in a bit
but also something I'm really curious is
as the head of development for the nosis
ecosystem you have mentioned so many
different types of projects that have so
many different types of focal areas so
what is your focus then what is kind of
your role do you manage a bunch of teams
uh like are you the head of the nosis
chain team and the head of the nosis pay
team and the head of the incubated
projects like cow Swap and safe and the
wallets what does this look like because
if you're the head of infrastructure
vosis you have a ton of infrastructure
to maintain right so I I don't have that
many responsibilities by any means um so
as I mentioned St SP out so sa is a
completely different entity at this
point so they have everything in house
same on te car as well um so many I mean
I don't remember exactly the numbers but
I think when I joined a bit more than a
year ago um or a bit before that
actually there were like more than 150
people working at noses now most of them
are going to those spal projects uh so
the team is way small at noes right now
um nois SP actually also a bit separate
because of very difference from um what
we were doing before I guess with I mean
different expertise more in the like
traditional finance and banking system
uh so what I do is mostly everything
that has to do with the chain so not
chain uh Bridges develops for uh noses
and then I mean dep development uh
auditing Blain analysis and yeah that's
basically so everything more lower level
um based everything around the chain
basically so um nosis itself abstracted
away these companies spun them off and
now they're kind of maintaining
themselves under the nosis name but
they're operating independently
yeah they even got rid of the NOS name
right so sa NOS safe is now safe one so
they rebranded completely to remove
noses um C was no protocon I think um
again very different name I mean of
course everyone knows it's the same
ecosystem but they are very different
prods right now and we don't share I
mean we share friendships whatever but
nothing like company wise uh we we don't
I mean we were closer together but not
as the same team basically cool so I've
been in the Colorado blockchain
Community since 2018 it's very etherium
and evm Centric uh it's focused on tools
that were built in ethland so um I
actually remember being rewarded for
doing a a trash pickup volunteer day I
got rewarded in die on X die and that
was kind of my first time using that
Network I got to see how cheap the fees
were how fast it was so I think it's
really interesting that nosis chain kind
of merged with or forked die could you
share a little bit about what that
relationship looks like how the two
communities merged and how now uh nosis
chain has its own identity that has been
kind of derived from that by the
converging of the two communities um yes
so I don't actually exactly know how
this happened because I wasn't there at
the time um so I I mean I experienced it
on and swarm side actually at at that
time um when of course they rebranded to
nois chain and then the Val I mean no
chain was before an AA chain with P so
basically um proof of stage kind of
chain with only I think 21 validators if
I'm not mistaken um so quite a bit more
centralized when NOS chain became no
chain from X um they worked on the merge
so basically the same thing that
happened to ethereum so I mean except of
going from Pro of War to Pro of Stak
with theum we went from steak to steak
but a different kind andiz one um yeah I
mean there's not much more I can say I'm
afraid of not because I wasn't there but
um yeah so no chain was XI change to be
way more etherum Centric um but that's
everything I can say cool no I
appreciate that um thanks for not making
things
up um so the one of the things that kind
of popped out to me is that there are a
lot of similarities and differences
between ethereum and nosis chain so
could you just kind of like dig a little
bit into how the two chains kind of
share a similar set of characteristics
and then maybe uh some of the different
types of challenges that nosis chain is
facing because of the differences
between a the
and nosis chain right so um they are
very very similar of course because we I
mean we are based on etherum um so we
support roughly the same clients uh only
on the execution are we only support uh
AR gon and mind at this point and gu is
being worked on hopefully soon to be
finished um andum of course are more
clients exu specifically for example b
or r or I mean medor uh on the side we
are basically running running exactly
the same as ethereum so we have all the
same clients except for prism that is
yeah I mean it's not working for now but
we are also watching on that so on the
cons consensus is exactly the same on
the execution area the biggest
difference or I guess are two um the
first one being that we have a BL time
of 5 Seconds in comparison to ethereum's
12 seconds so 2.4 times faster and he Bo
have only 16 slots around than 32 Suns
um that Mak finality a bit faster
basically um and of course we have a bit
more throughput because we have pass
blocks which also comes with trof of
course because it is more difficult to
validate for nois chain um theoretically
because you have to build the blocks way
faster it also use more I mean bandwidth
storage um and compute because of that
uh so that's a tradeoff of course which
could potentially lead to a bit of dis
uh sorry centralization because if I
mean a node in South Africa with a very
bad prodction for example could not uh
follow the chain or at least not as
easily as ethereum so there is a
downside to that but of course you have
a bit higher scalability and cheaper
prices but that's not only because of
that the second difference is that the
base I mean Native token is that is or
something that can fluctuate it's
actually di so um yeah so you're not
dependent on some token that can
increase or lose value um like basically
on the whim so transaction today that
this 10 gray in gas price yeah will cost
the same today and in in one year
basically but in ethereum the same
transaction could cost 10 times more if
etherum is worth sorry is worth 10 times
more um but still we are validating with
gno um that's also a difference actually
because on ethereum you validate with
the native token and nois you have the
Dig token be I mean d sorry and the
validating token is Glo so that's also a
difference um so when you validate on no
chain you actually get uh consensus lay
rewards in gno and transaction fees in
XI um so that that's a bit difference
and I think that's mostly it I mean for
the rest we are very closely aligned
with ethereum we believe I mean in
ethereum's ecosystem and everything so
we we follow it quite religiously and we
actually doing I mean hard working to
Denco basically at the same time as
ethereum um so yeah we really want to to
stay in line um we are exploring
additional features but the way we build
them is actually like not integrated uh
in the chain and more like as a a plugin
architecture that make sense um so that
we can stay in syn with ethereum without
having to do many changes every time um
and then if this works out and is
interesting for the for the ecosystem we
could potentially adapt this for eum as
well um later down the road and maybe
have like a bit more tly coupled like
Tech basically but for now we're trying
to just build it as a pling yeah
architecture can can you give an example
like this of this um I'm thinking maybe
yeah could you just give an example of
how this kind of like plug-and-play
features or
modularity uh
that isn't implementable into ethereum
right now um but could be based off of
the work that you've done with nosis
chain can you just kind of like Eli 5 an
example yeah absolutely um so I mean
it's something that could not be done on
ethereum but maybe we have we have it
easier basically because it's a smaller
chain that has less like value locks
inside so there's less risk and just
just to coordinate and whatever canate a
bit faster so one example is the sh
speaking chain um so basically the idea
is to have encrypted transactions in
like the base layers uh so for now if
you want to I mean right now if you want
to avoid M or well yeah getting frr and
things like that you basically have to
use like a a private man pool so for
example flash buts or a blocker or this
type of service um which of course comes
with like another of cave yet right so
technically yeah you you are protected
by them but they still have your
transaction and they can still play with
it right so we actually give like a lot
of power to those Services right so
flashs could just decide to I mean they
probably wouldn't do it because of
reputation but they could technically
make a lot of money by using all
transactions that only they have access
to uh which I'm not a huge fan of um and
another CH we want to say like yeah we
have we want to have a neutral work
space so no entities the one that canens
you know one that can on of this so for
example on etherum you can also I mean
most blocks are I don't have the the
data right now I I forgot about it but
uh most BLS are actually censored with
like you know op compliance basically so
for now cash all services just kind of
any transactions that user services are
mostly um blacklisted um of course you
can still get a transaction through but
it will take way more time because
validators are not including them in
modle you will get in at some point but
it could take time so the idea to fix
this of course uh I mean the way we are
trying to do it is with shutter so voice
the partner um the idea would be to
encrypt transactions actually onchain
directly so you post an encrypted
transaction uh and then validators have
to include them in the nextext Block in
the right order so you they can't like
decrypt them and
choose the order because then they get
slashed um and yeah so we would have in
the base layer encrypted transactions
that cannot be sensored and that cannot
be sandwiched because you cannot choose
the order basically um and this is built
as a plugin architecture I would say um
an no chain and potentially if it's uh
well received or Mak a lot of sense then
this could be adopted by ecosystem I
mean we haven't talked about it with DF
or anything yet uh it's very much in the
in the beginning phases right but um
that that could be an idea at least do
you um based off of the research that
you do and and the team that you work
with are you getting the sense that this
kind of me me resistance is becoming
kind of like uh like maybe in the future
almost all popular chains will have some
sort of me resistance baked into the
architecture um that's a good question
I'm I mean for when I'm is very familiar
with many other ecosystems I mean I know
B about s and po of course but um I
don't know if it's very interesting to
have this in the base layer I think some
degree of MV is always interesting I
mean can be interesting at least
um yeah I don't know it's it's a tough
question I think I mean you don't need a
protection for everything right there
are perfectly valid transactions that
don't need to be M proof um but I think
some sort of mechanism to not get I mean
yeah some mechanism will have to to
exist I guess especially for everything
Rel to Def fire um yeah I don't know
yeah no I appreciate it I I just asked
because um I think in the past two weeks
uh alongside nosis chain I've seen two
other projects that are um going after
meev resistance um and another solution
I've seen alongside encrypted me pools
is enveloped transactions so I was just
kind of curious is if this is becoming
uh like a forthcoming industry narrative
or anything like that but I think that
remains to be seen yeah abolutely so
yeah so something then um I'm curious to
hear about is nosis chain is kind of at
this moment of figuring out what its
identity is going to be moving forward
and in that respect I mean is nosis
going to be an L1 or is it going to be
an L2 uh or maybe some sort of hybrid of
the two
um so again let's just assume our
audience is both made up of crypto
Natives and somebody who bought their
first ethereum yesterday uh maybe we can
just briefly do a quick overview of the
differences between what an L1 and an L2
is and then maybe you can share some of
your insights into how you see nosis
chain kind of filling those gaps or um
becoming either an L1 an L2 L 1.5 or
whatever uh moving forward okay so maybe
that's start um with the beginning so to
keep it quite simple the difference
between a layer one and Layer Two is
that the layer two chain would um in
most cases inherit its security from the
layer one it's based on so for example
optimism arbitrum um all those basically
use ethereum as the base layer so you P
transactions on ethereum and then they
get executed on optimism and uh
Avalanche and whatever um
so that's the the biggest part I would
say so optimism doesn't have validators
they don't have well they have a SE
winter it's kind of the same thing but
it's not um but yeah they don't have
validators no miners no things like that
whereas eum has validators Bitcoin has
miners son has vators as well um so
don't know they one chains nosis chain
also of course exactly the same as
ethereum uh we have I think 80 90 maybe
even 200,000 soon um by address right
now ethereum I haven't checked recently
but more than 8 800,000 as far as I know
um so yeah that's the main difference so
L get the secur security some Val and
minus from the one they are based on um
and of course with to scale s so cheaper
transactions more per more per uh
seconds uh things like that um so for no
specifically actually there have been a
lot of Talks by our Founders um because
they're not afid of of being a layer two
um so again I'm not necessarily
extremely up to date with everything
related to layer twos but most of them
up until recently at least were quite
centralized so they have one sequencer
meaning the sequencer that is run mostly
by um I mean the foundation that SP up
the chain right they can decide to do
whatever they want so they can all the
transactions like they want to they can
sensor transactions um so yeah it's very
centralized of course there are things
that are put in place to solve this for
example um inclusion list and things
like that so you can force your
transaction into a layer 2 block um but
I'm not sure how like readily available
this already is um so yeah I mean for
now this chain definitely is going to
stay in a one chain um because yeah we
want to stay sensorship resistance and
have this like credible credibly neutral
black space um but we are exploring ways
to kind of get the security benefits
from ethereum On no chain with better
Bridges and um yeah basically technology
that can how can I explain this in like
an easy way but post basically snapshots
of no chain to ethereum and then if
something goes wrong or the chain gets
compromised or we have like a
66% attack from validators or I don't
know the entire network breaks down some
more for some reason that technically
can't happen but let's imagine uh then
you could be able to you would be able
to go to ethereum and still get your
funds out of this chain to ethereum so
kind of like you would be able to do a
layer two but still wi keeping like the
the layer two sorry the layer one value
datas we have currently so this is
something we are exploring it's not
something is going to see the light
anytime soon um but still I mean we have
ZK EVMS now that can basically enate
transactions and verify they that
basically from a safe route you execute
transactions and you get the right one
after that uh so basically to to to
verify that um yeah that the chain went
correctly everything yeah works out you
can verify that so technically we could
emulate those chain on eal for example
roughly said I mean it's it's very
basically explained um and yeah do you
could potentially be able to at least
get your funds out so you brought up an
interesting point with the ZK avms and
and how you can potentially get your
nosis funds out on ethereum and that way
nosis would be acting as an L2 just in
this specific instance how do you keep
your finger on the pulse for all these
ZKA evm projects um there's a handful
whose main Nets just went live in the
past quarter or two uh there's probably
a handful other projects that are
building so and you also have tons of
things to keep your um focus on uh
building in house so I'm just also kind
of curious to hear how do you keep your
education up to date because there is
just so much stuff to pay attention to
uh not only in the blockchain space in
general but let alone evm land um so
what's what are some of the best
practices that you and your team have
for paying attention to what's going on
out there and figuring out what you
might want to implement into nois chain
right that's a good question there is
indeed a lot happening I say I mean as a
in general it's just impossible to keep
up with everything um so I guess we kind
of get to it once it makes sense so for
example I mean no such ch right now the
transaction costs are quite cheap so we
don't have to scale right now um but
still for example for no pay I mean the
idea is to have a payment Visa payment
Network that is very high scale um so
this will require at some point scaling
Solutions bit I mean l 2os l3s ZK VMS or
optimis based stes or whatever so this
is already being explored of course um
because I mean we have to be ready when
that happened right um and then I would
say participating in hackaton is very
interesting generally because um yeah
you learn about a lot of stuff happening
while judging um Partnerships very
important you talk with all kinds of
different projects or yeah Partnerships
grants or cross promotions or whatever
um that is very interesting as well um
and then just I mean we're all I think
very passionate so we read the the
latest and great is it's fun we want to
learn about it so that's also how most
of it happens I would say um but they
staying up to dat and everything is
basically impossible so yeah once you
need it to research it and then
hopefully it's useful it's funny how
analog uh that sounds um basically have
conversations and read papers that
people write
yeah um so you mentioned earlier the
shutterz beacon chain which I think is
kind of like the next big Focus on your
road map for uh nosis change
infrastructure uh we talked a little bit
about um me resistance and how it will
be built into uh the beacon chain uh you
guys are currently live with testnet um
can you share some insights gleaned from
the beacon chain being on test net uh
can you also share some other kind of
features that you're looking to build
into it um okay so I mean we do have a
beacon chain on tests um and we have
deployed on tested right now but the the
combination between both of them is not
live yet um so basically suer it's quite
complex they have key bir that basically
generate Keys um through the cryto
transactions that are I mean that have
to be included in notex Brock uh the Bon
chain I mean we have it I every ethereum
I mean no not everyone but ethereum no
chain and of course only the tesl based
on those how a b ch right that's um like
part of the merge F in the day um but
yeah we don't have the the integration
between those two yet we
are I'm working on it of course but it's
not something you can already test cool
um so what about
interoperability uh We've Spoken a lot
about l2s uh zkm kind of there's an
inherent uh nature of interoperability
when it comes to evm land uh but what
about like uh in the future like let's
say cos OS really takes off or polka dot
or salana some of these non- evm sort of
ecosystems how do you guys think about
those are you staying in your lane
working on evm land are you keeping some
doors open in case it there does become
a future where Cosmos and the ethereum
ecosystem are extremely intertwined um
just from you know a chains perspective
how do you view this um that's a good
question I think
uh I mean me uh in my team at least at
another a chain we are fairly evm
centered um of course we have like the
Bridge Department that has the main
bridge between etherum and N chain U but
is um yeah exporting a lot of
Technologies to have other types of
bridges and more secure Bridges so for
example uh we are working on hasi which
is well the objective is to have the
bridge to end on all the bridges
basically that's the idea but the way it
works Bally so um many bridges that
basically work together uh so you are
for example you want to bridge to notice
chain uh and you can through has you
would say Okay I want five Bridges to
agree that this trans transaction
actually went through for example uh and
then when you have conest from all those
bridges on Mage chain then you can Min
stens or relay a message or whatever um
so basically kind of decentralizing the
bridge parts that is history quite
centralized um so that's the idea of
Hari of course this right now is still
focused but we I mean there's no reason
why we could not reach between different
Technologies right um so yeah on the Bri
side I'm sure we are going to work with
other projects uh in the future um but
yeah we we don't have much more research
with other chains um except for Bridges
at least that makes sense um focus on
what you know and and and build out uh
what you kind of have on your radar and
and in your ecosystem and and the
knowledge base that your team has of
broader evm land um you did mention
earlier that there's this kind of dual
token model where there's the gno kind
of governance token for lack of better
phrasing that also turns out rewards in
gno and as well as diet I believe so so
I'm just kind of curious then um with
governance there's voting uh presumably
we're voting on things that matter about
the direction of the network so how does
nois Dao um kind of play into the work
that you do does the Dow dictate any of
the things that you're focusing on as
head of infrastructure is the Dow
focusing on completely different sorts
of governance issues um how do kind of
like the two overlap um yeah so the Dow
does govern what we do um so for I mean
we are fairly independent but we still
want to the community's like opinion so
for bigger projects or important
projects or anything that could impact
basically our users or uh the ecosystem
we ourselves write proposals to the DS
um and then our users can discuss them
and vote on them and potentially even
like reject them if they are not happy
with it I don't think it has ever
happened um before but I'm sure for
example for the X no transition there
must have been aot of conversations
going on for because before there was
like this stake token which was actually
like called stake um and that was
converted to J for example so this is
something that has to be discussed and
then vo it on um yeah I mean when when
we do brid changes and things like that
we have to to discuss them um so there's
a lot of confidence and even just for
bridge updates for example it does not
necessarily go through the Dow but we
have many many different um signers
different companies signing on the on
the bridge multi um that then can
validate that we did our job correctly
um that they agree with what you're
doing and all of that so uh in basically
for everything important we do there are
many steps and we try to keep the
community up to date um for example for
the hard for to tenun I I guess there's
no really reason to ask the community
because I mean if they would don't want
to they can also not update for example
or hard fork or whatever they probably
wouldn't but they can um but imagine um
if for example tomorrow instead of
taking once you know you had to stay 20
then that's something we would discuss
with uh the community
for do you have a sense of who the
stakeholders are is it like uh the the
nosis founders is it uh teams that have
a lot of stake because they build in the
ecosystem is it just simple retail token
holders is it a combination of all do
you not have any idea I honestly
couldn't tell you I mean that's that
yeah you should ask cple people that I
guess cool um kind of wrapping up I want
to zoom out a little bit and um I
understand full well that you work on
infrastructure and more technical things
so this might be a question that you
might not be able to answer but I am
curious to hear how uh reg Regional
regulations might impact how you and
your team build and what you build um
I'm based in the states and outlook for
crypto is very shaky right now a lot of
projects are leaving companies are
offshoring um folks
aren't International folks who would
have come to the US to study aren't even
coming here anymore to study so as a
country we're losing out on Talent so
I'm just wondering if uh Regional and
jurisdictional regulations and outlook
on crypto and blockchain has any impact
at all on your outlook or the way that
you and your team choose to build right
so um well I I'm more on the on the
Chain side indeed so that's well
censorship resist whenever we cannot
just bring access to the stat United
States of course uh we are still
building you know projects for example
we have no
um or well yeah some projects that need
to interact with the or could interact
with the United States mostly frontends
uh where we just mostly just block
access to the US andn uh but that's the
extent of what I personally know um I
know for no SP there's also another of
regulations of course it's not available
in the United States yet um but I don't
know I mean I'm sure the legal team is
uh doing it another for that's yeah it's
unfortunate um becoming more and more
used to missing out on airdrops or
participating in projects simply because
of the regul the the nation that some
folks are live in um but I appreciate
that there's only so much you you need
to worry about when it comes to uh
technical stuff especially as it
pertains to censorship resistance um so
you are the head of infrastructure nosis
chain has hundreds of thousands of
validator nodes excuse me if I used the
term incorrectly long story short
whenever you're pushing out a major
update there's a lot of collaboration
and a lot of people that you need to get
on the same page so what is kind of like
your biggest lesson learned or your
biggest takeaway uh or biggest piece of
advice that you have for uh like major
AR architecture upgrades when you have
to get so many teams on the same page
for iterating um upon the current
version of the network that you have
what's kind of like the key takeaway for
Success when uh performing major Network
architectural upgrades um well I guess
the most important part is just let uh
well give enough time for people or
users to do updates basically so for
example for Den um I think everything is
ready since a few weeks and it is in two
weeks some people had or in total would
have had and four weeks to update uh
push comes out constantly so every every
couple of days you have to tell the
community that might not have been there
last week for example um that they have
to update uh which versions they have to
update to what criteria they have to
fulfill to be ready for the next update
all of this so yeah most just comes and
giving enough time I would say that's
the key to a successful Network update
or hot horing guys simple and short and
straight to the point I love it um so at
dcon 2023 in Berlin you spoke about the
launch to the shutterz beacon chain um
let's put on our speculation hat and
let's say it's November
2024 um what do you want to be on stage
uh at an event like dcon talking about
for the future of nosis chain um after
you've kind of gone after the goals that
you had for this year um what are you
hoping to do in the medium term um with
nois chain hm that's a very good
question um yeah I don't really have any
great answer for this right now so of
course I mean we want to stay in in in
sync with ethereum um hopefully also
help ethereum a bit if we can um but
yeah I mean that that's mostly the
important part staying in with ethereum
building a Tois chain potentially for
like stability and no um but yeah I
don't have a better answer for you I'm
afraid it's it's kind of an unfair
question because uh you know just
surviving quarter to quarter is a feat
in it of itself in the blockchain crypto
space I appreciate that um cool so
what's the best way that people can keep
up to date with you or if maybe a
developer is listening who's interested
in building on nosis chain what's the
best way that they can reach out to that
community and ecosystem uh I guess the
most
uh why I mean of course no. you can find
the Discord uh link and I guess the
Twitter link as well so p no no chain on
Twitter uh join the Discord and then
just chat with us we are available I am
on Discord often as well so yeah just
come BL love it phip thank you so much
for sharing an hour of your time today
it was awesome to dig into uh
infrastructure with you and to hear more
about nosis chain and kind of where you
guys have come from and where you're
going and some exciting things to pay
attention to um I was looking forward to
this uh I've been hearing many many
folks talk about the nosis ecosystem
since I've been in the blockchain space
since 2017 so um it was an honor to have
you come join the show and to talk about
some of the really cool things you're
working on well thanks for having me and
uh looking forward to catching you again
on an episode uh later in the future
it's unfortunate you're not here for eat
Denver but uh hopefully we get to uh run
to each other at some sort of event in
the future absolutely maybe next
year cheers brother cheers well what did
you think of that conversation I thought
it was super interesting to have Philipe
join and break down some of the rather
large Concepts such as layer ones versus
layer twos and how nosis chain examines
the tradeoffs of each as it iterates on
its own chain it was also really cool to
hear more about the technical
differences between ethereum and nosis
chain but also how the two complement
one another and it was interesting to
learn more about how the nosis ecosystem
has decentralized itself and given each
of its internally incubated projects
like safe more autonomy by spinning
these teams off into their own entities
to keep up to date with the podcast head
over to
www.smart economy podcast.com and if you
like the guests that we've had on the
show please consider showing support for
the show by rating and reviewing your
favorite episodes on your favorite
podcasting platform every rating and
review really helps us get the show in
front of more ears and eyes and of
course if you're a Neo token holder
please consider voting for Neo news
today as your Council representative
we've been serving the Neo ecosystem
since 2017 and will continue to do so by
putting portions of our Council rewards
directly back into ecosystem growth
initiatives with all that said thank you
so much for taking the time to listen to
the smart economy podcast and we look
forward to catching you on the next
episode